# Overview
<p>The goal of my project is to explore how film ratings, genres, budgets, and other features like release details, relate to the overall box office gross of the movie. I’m using publicly available datasets from Kaggle and Mendeley Data in the hopes of identifying any trends and correlations between overall critical and commercial reception through Rotten Tomatoes ratings and box office success, and other different features about the film. My project will be based on evidence in its approach, examining these measurable features to see how they influence financial outcomes for films. For my analysis, I will focus on whether high movie production budgets lead to higher ratings or better box office success and how different features can influence these outcomes. I will also examine if certain genres tend to outperform others consistently, and how this has changed over time. I will be combining two datasets, one that contains the ratings data, and one that contains the financial data and movie features, to explore these trends. Merging the two datasets will not only allow me to analyze all aspects of each film, but also allow me to cross-analyze box office performance with audience ratings together. My end goal for this project is to uncover insights that describe how and why certain films succeed, not just financially, but critically as well.</p>

# Research Questions
<p>I have come up with four research questions that I plan to address for this project.<br><br>First: Do movies with higher production budgets tend to gross higher in the box office? A common misconception of the industry (in my personal opinion) is that the more that is spent on a movie, the more that audiences will want to see it. This will address, through the evidence available, whether or not that seems to be true.<br><br>Next: How strongly do IMDb ratings correlate with box office performance? Audiences may not always enjoy a film, though they might go to see it. Critical reception is just as important as financial success for a film’s longevity.<br><br>Third: Are certain genres more likely than others to produce films that will gross high at the box office? Genre is maybe the single most defining feature of a film. Action movies, comedies, dramas, etc, all operate under very different market expectations. Addressing this will also allow me to see whether certain genres tend to be more prevalent among top movies. This way, I’ll be able to identify if certain genres are consistently successful, commercially, or critically, and how audience tastes shift over time.<br><br>Last: How have movie budgets and how has box office performance changed over time for different genres? Are modern films more expensive to produce than those from decades ago? Has ROI grown proportionately, or has inflation taken a toll on this. By analyzing this, I can see trends that reflect not only industry growth, but shifts in consumption as well.</p>

# Team 
<p>I will be completing this project individually, taking care of all stages of the data lifecycle: collection, integration, cleaning, analysis, and visualization.</p>

# Datasets
<p>I will use two similar datasets for this project, each supplementing the other for any gaps in data.<br>First: I will be using the Rotten Tomatoes Movies - Mendeley Data, which contains basic data on movies, including critic and audience scores as percentages. This is downloadable as a CSV file.<br>Next: I will be using the Top 1000 Highest Grossing Movies dataset from Kaggle, which contains data on the top 1000 highest grossing Hollywood movies as listed on IMDB, complete with genre, budget and sales data. This is also downloadable as a CSV file.<br>I will join both datasets using movie titles and release dates as keys. I will do basic cleaning and ensure that naming conventions are consistent between both datasets, allowing me to integrate them more cleanly and join the datasets to contain both rating metrics and financial data.</p>

# Timeline
<p>As stated above, I will be completing the project on my own and I will be taking on all responsibilities of the project.<br>Timeline:<br>
* Week 1: Define project plan and get datasets <br>
* Week 2/3: Clean and join datasets using pandas <br>
* Week 4: Perform exploratory analysis and summary statistics on the data <br>
* Week 5: Analyze correlations and produce visualizations <br>
* Week 6: Finalize report<br><br>
This is a rough timeline for the project.</p>

# Constraints
<p>One practical constraint is not being able to analyze the reviews of the films themselves. The Mendeley dataset includes links to all movies, but it would be very impractical to manually go through each movie’s page of reviews. Another practical constraint would be a selection bias, just because I can only look at films that are listed on both Rotten Tomatoes and IMDB. Independent or films made outside of the USA may be underrepresented, meaning the analysis reflects Hollywood and its trends rather than all cinema. This may not provide a full picture of movies’ box office performance over time, as some may be unlisted or not overlap on either website.</p>

# Gaps
<p> The biggest issue that may prevent a strong analysis is missing historical economic factors. For example, the Covid-19 pandemic a few years ago may impact both budgets and box office performance, but this can vary depending on the region. I need to decide if I want to focus on the objective data on the films, or if it would be practical to do more research to explain some of the trends in the data. Another gap would be that the financial information will not account for inflation, which may skew some of my statistics. I would need to decide whether to account for inflation in my analysis, though I think addressing the issue would require much more external data on historical economics, which, in my opinion, falls outside of the scope of my project. Gaps aside, the data regardless provides me with meaningful insights into the general trends of the industry.</p>
